REVISTA DE INFORMÁTICA APLICADA VOL. 6 - Nº 01 - JAN/JUN 2010 49
Determinant factors of information
use or misuse in Wikipedia
Fatores determinantes do uso ou
desuso da informação na Wikipédia
Yin-Leng Theng, Jiang Tao
Wee Kim Wee School of Communication and Information
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
tyltheng@ntu.edu.sg, jiangtao@ntu.edu.sg
Resumo: A Wikipédia, maior enciclopédia multilíngue de conteúdos livres na Internet, é muito popular
entre os estudantes. No entanto, fica a questão: a Wikipédia é uma bênção ou uma desgraça para os
alunos da sociedade contemporânea? Este trabalho descreve um estudo empírico com o propósito de
investigar os fatores determinantes do uso ou desuso da informação na Wikipédia. Optou-se aqui por se
desenvolver um modelo de pesquisa com base na Teoria Unificada de Aceitação e Uso de Tecnologia
(Uataut). Setenta e três estudantes de uma universidade local tomaram parte na pesquisa. Os resultados
indicam que a expectativa de desempenho dos entrevistados, a expectativa de esforço e a influência
social foram aspectos significativos na promoção da utilização da informação. O artigo se conclui com
implicações para os educadores.
Palavras-chave: Wikipédia, uso da informação, uso da tecnologia.
Abstract: Wikipedia, biggest multilingual free-content encyclopedia on the Internet, is popular with students.
Is Wikipedia a wane or bane for our students? This paper describes an empirical study to investigate
determinant factors of information use or misuse in Wikipedia. We developed a research model based on
the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UATAUT). Seventy-three students of a local
university took part in the survey. Findings indicate that respondents’ performance expectancy, effort
expectancy, and social influence were significant in encouraging information use. The paper concludes
with implications for educators.
Keywords: Wikipedia, information use, use of technology.
50 JORNAL OF APPLIED COMPUTING VOL. 6 - Nº 01 - JAN/JUN 2010
INTRODUCTION
Wikipedia, launched in January 2001 by
Wades and Sanger, has become the biggest
multilingual free-content encyclopedia on the
Internet, fulfilling the initial goal to become a freecontent
encyclopedia (ALMEIDA, et al., 2007).
Wikipedia has grown rapidly into one of the
largest reference web sites, and in 2008, it attracted
at least 684 million visitors yearly (WIKIPEDIA
WEBSITE, 2008). Unique to Wikipedia, it allows
collaborative contribution and moderation from
the user communities. As an information source,
Wikipedia has many advantages: (I) it is easy to
access online; (II) contents are free; and (II)
contents can be added very quickly. Compared
to printed encyclopedias which may take years
to get their contents updated, Wikipedia contents
can be updated quickly.
Many argue that Wikipedia content lacks reliability
and stability, since anyone can add or change
content. Authors of articles may not necessarily be
experts on the topics they write about, leaving a lot
of room for errors, misinformation, and bias (ERIC,
2008). Hence, schools and universities do not
encourage Wikipedia as a major source of
information. James Wales, founder of Wikipedia,
also shared similar sentiments that it is not suitable
for academic uses, acknowledging that it pretty
good, but one has to discern the correct use of
information found in Wikipedia (JASCHIK, 2007).
However, not everyone agrees that Wikipedia
lacks of reliability and stability. In fact, the contents
of Wikipedia were highly regarded among the
online communities. Nature conducted a comparison
of the Wikipedia and other encyclopedias,
the articles in Wikipedia were of quality comparable
to those in the other encyclopedias (GILES,
2005). Rosenzweig (2006), Director of the Centre
for History and New Media at George Mason
University, did an analysis on the accuracy of
Wikipedia for the Journal of American History,
and he found that in many entries, Wikipedia was
as accurate as or even more accurate than those
traditional encyclopedias.
The Wikipedia website (2008) also argued that
any encyclopedia is a starting point for research,
not an ending point. An encyclopedia is a good
resource to get a general understanding of a
subject, but we do need books or other articles for
more detailed, precise, and careful reasoned
information. Therefore, all sources need to be
evaluated. Jaschik (2007) argued that it is not the
right way to just tell students “don’t use it”, as
students face “an ocean of information” today,
much of it of poor quality. Students should instead
be teaching students how to use other sources and
equip students with critical thinking skills to
evaluate information.
The question we want to ask is: Is Wikipedia a
wane or bane for our students? This paper
describes an empirical study to investigate
determinant factors of information use or misuse
in Wikipedia. The remaining part of this paper is
organized as follows. In the following section, the
conceptual framework based on the Unified
Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology
(UATAUT) is described and discussed. Next, we
explain the research objectives and hypotheses.
Finally, the results obtained from analysis are
shown, conclusions drawn and implications for
pedagogy and education of information.
Related Studies and Unified Theory of
Acceptance and Use of Technology
(UATAUT)
In this section, we review eight previous widely
accepted models in understanding factors that
influence the use of information systems (IS):
1. Theories of Information System (IS)
Adoption.
IS research has long studied how and why
individuals adopt new information technologies.
There are various theories or models for
information system (IS) adoption studies. They are
the Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA), the Technology
Acceptance Model (TAM), the Motivational
Model (MM), the Theory of Planned Behavior
(TPB) and Decomposed Theory of Planned
Behavior (DTPB), Combined TAM and TPB (CTAM-
TPB), the Model of PC Utilization (MPCU),
the Innovation Diffusion Theory (IDT), the Social
Cognitive Theory (SCT), and the Unified Theory
of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT).
REVISTA DE INFORMÁTICA APLICADA VOL. 6 - Nº 01 - JAN/JUN 2010 51
2. Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA).
Drawn from social psychology, Theory of
Reasoned Action (TRA) is one of the most fundamental
and influential theories of human
behavior. It has been used to predict a wide range
of behaviors (Sheppard Hartwick and Warshaw,
1988). It was proposed by Fishbein and Ajzen
(1975) in a book “Belief, attitude, intention, and
behavior: An introduction to theory and research”
published by Addison-Wesley Publishing
Company. The theory posits that individual
behavior is influenced by his/her behavioral
intentions where behavioral intentions are
influenced by his/her attitude toward the behavior
and subjective norms related to performing the
behavior. There are various researches about the
TRA theory.
3. Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB).
TPB extended TRA by adding the construct of
perceived behavioral control (PBC). The extension
was reasoned as the limitation of TRA in dealing
with behaviors over which people have incomplete
volitional control (AJZEN, 1991). The theory posits
that individual behavior is influenced by perceived
behavioral control and behavioral intentions
where behavioral intentions are a function of an
individual’s attitude toward the behavior, the
subjective norms related to performing the
behavior, and the perceived behavioral control.
4. Decomposed Theory of Planned Behavior
(DTPB).
DTPB is an extension of the TRA and TPB.
Taylor and Todd (1995) decomposed the constructs
of the TPB into more detailed components.
Attitudes were decomposed into perceived ease of
use, perceived usefulness, and compatibility.
Subjective norms were decomposed into peer’s
influence and superior’s influence. Perceived
behavioral control was decomposed into selfefficacy,
resource facilitating conditions, and
technology facilitation conditions.
5. Technology Acceptance Model (TAM).
TAM is an adaptation of the Theory of
Reasoned Action (TRA) to the field of IS. TAM
has been widely applied to a diverse set of
technologies and users. Davis (1989) proposed
this theory after his study of 152 subjects of 4
application programs. The theory posits that
perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use
determine an individual’s intention to use a
system, and the intention to use will cause an
actual system use.
The TAM is supported by another study done
by Davis, Bagozzi and Warshaw (1989). Venkatesh
and Davis (2000) extended TAM into TAM2
by adding subjective norm as an additional
predictor of intention in the case of mandatory
system use, and other additional constructs
including social influence processes and cognitive
instrumental processes. The variables in TAM2
included: usage, intention to use, perceived ease
of use, perceived usefulness, experience, social
influence processes (subjective norm, voluntariness,
and image), cognitive instrumental processes
(job relevance, output quality, results
demonstrability).
6. Motivational Model (MM).
A significant body of research in psychology
has supported general motivation theory as an
explanation for behavior. The Motivational
Model (MM) comes from self-determination
theory by Deci and Ryan (1985). The
motivational model posits that intrinsic
motivation and extrinsic motivation determine
the use behavior. Deci and Ryan (1985) included
the third construct “amotivational style” into the
model. Figure 2.6 shows the diagram of the
motivational model. Davis, Bagozzi, and
Warshaw (1992) used this model to study 240
students using the word processing and business
graphics programs. They depicted intrinsic and
extrinsic motivations into a model using
enjoyment and perceived usefulness constructs.
The model also included perceived ease of use
and output quality. The dependent variables were
intention and usage. The results indicated that
the perceived usefulness (extrinsic motivations)
and enjoyment (intrinsic motivations) were both
significant on intention. And perceived usefulness
and enjoyment were found to mediate fully the
effect of perceived ease of use and output quality
on both intention and usage.
52 JORNAL OF APPLIED COMPUTING VOL. 6 - Nº 01 - JAN/JUN 2010
7. Model of Personal Computers Utilization
(MPCU).
Landis, Triandis, and Adamopoulos (1978)
studied 77 teachers using classroom observation
technique on their intention and habits affecting
behavior. The results indicated that habit was
stronger than intention in predicting behavior.
Later, Triandis (1980) proposed the MPCU
model which claimed that a behavior intention
was determined by three aspects: the attitude
aspect, the social norms aspect, and the habitual
aspect. Thompson, Higgins, and Howell (1991)
excluded the habitual part because of the difficult
distinction between habits of PC use and the
behavior of PC use.
Finally, the model was concluded into that the
behavior of the PC use was determined by job-fit,
complexity, long term consequences, affect towards
use, social factors, and facilitating conditions. Figure
2.7 shows the diagram of the model of PC
utilization. Thompson, Higgins, and Howell (1991)
did a study using 278 knowledge workers on their
PC usage. The results indicated that job-fit,
complexity, long term consequences, social factors,
and facilitating conditions were all significant to
PC use, but affect was not significant.
8. Innovation Diffusion Theory (IDT).
Grounded in sociology, Innovation Diffusion
Theory (IDT) has been used since the 1960s to study
a variety of innovations, ranging from agricultural
tools to organizational innovation (ROGERS, 1995).
Within information systems, Moore and Benbasat
(1991) adapted the characteristics of innovations
presented in Rogers and redefined a set of constructs
(voluntariness, relative advantage, compatibility,
image, ease of use, result demonstrability, visibility,
and trial ability) that could be used to study individual
technology acceptance. Plouffe, Hulland and
Vandenbosch (2001) tested sets of antecedent
constructs drawn from both TAM and the
innovation diffusion theory, and compared with one
another. The dependent variable was intention to
use. The results indicated that the IDT constructs
explained 45% of the variance in intention, and
TAM explained 32.7%. The authors concluded that
the IDT provided more detail than TAM, and TAM
was simple and might be misleading in certain
situations. Fitzgerald and Kie (2002) tested a
comprehensive model which integrated IDT and
some other proposed models. The study was done
by a survey of 128 respondents about online
purchasing. The IDT constructs were used as
antecedents of attitude. The results indicated that
attitude was a strong predictor of intention to use.
For adopters, result demonstrability and risk were
significant. While for non-adopters, risk was
significant.
9. Social Cognitive Theory (SCT).
This theory identifies human behavior as an
interaction of personal factors, behavior, and the
environment (COMPEAU and HIGGINS, 1995a).
Compeau and Higgins (1995a) tested it and the
results indicated that all the relationships were
significant except the other users’ effect on
personal outcome expectations. Compeau and
Higgins (1995b) tested a comprehensive model
which integrated SCT and some other proposed
models in another study at the same year. The
study validated an instrument to measure the
computer self-efficacy (CSE). The results indicated
that computer self-efficacy would affect usage,
outcome expectations, anxiety, and affect. Encouragement
by others and others’ use will affect
computer self-efficacy and outcome expectations.
Locke, Frederick, Lee and Bobko (1984)
concluded that self-efficacy was a strong predictor
of goal and performance in their study of 209
students’ behavior. Ability and past performance
also determined the goal. An interesting finding
of this study was that self-efficacy was more
strongly related to past performance than future
performance, but self-efficacy was still a strong
predictor of future performance. The findings in
this study were consistent with the findings by
Harrison, Rainer, Hochwarter, and Thompson,
(1997) in testing the computer usage of 776
university employees.
10. Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of
Technology (UTAUT).
Venkatesh, Morris, Davis, and Davis (2003)
formulated the Unified Theory of Acceptance and
REVISTA DE INFORMÁTICA APLICADA VOL. 6 - Nº 01 - JAN/JUN 2010 53
Use of Technology (UTAUT) to integrate the main
computing user acceptance models. The UTAUT
aims to explain user intentions to use an IS and
subsequent use behavior. The theory holds that
four key constructs (performance expectancy,
effort expectancy, social influence, and facilitating
conditions) are direct determinants of usage
intention and behavior. Gender, age, experience,
and voluntariness of use are posited to mediate
the impact of the four key constructs on usage
intention and behavior.
The theory was developed through a review
and consolidation of the constructs of 8 models
from earlier researches to explain IS usage
behavior. These 8 models are theory of reasoned
action (TRA), technology acceptance model (TAM/
TAM2), motivational model (MM), theory of
planned behavior (TPB), a combined theory of
planned behavior/technology acceptance model
(C-TPB- AM), model of PC utilization (MPCU),
innovation diffusion theory (IDT), and social
cognitive theory (SCT). The UTAUT supported
that the effect of performance expectancy on
behavioral intention was stronger for men and
younger users. And the effect of effort expectancy
on behavioral intention was stronger for women,
older users, and users with less experience. The
effect of social influence on behavioral intention
was stronger for women, older users, under
conditions of mandatory use, and users with less
experience. Finally, facilitating conditions were not
significant to behavioral intention, but the effect
of facilitating conditions on usage was stronger
for older users and users with more experience.
One of the important findings of Venkatesh et
al. (2003) was that self-efficacy and anxiety was
not direct significant to the behavioral intention.
Another important finding was that facilitating
conditions were not significant to behavioral
intention and direct determined the usage behavior.
This unified model was able to explain 70% of
the variance in behavioral intention, while the
previous models can only account 40% of the
variance (VENKATESH et al., 2003). Also, this model
was built from other widely accepted models. Thus,
the UTAUT model was selected for the particular
research of the acceptance and use of Wikipedia.
THE STUDY
Research Model
The research model was formulated based
mainly on the UTAUT model with four constructs
(Performance Expectancy, Effort Expectancy, Social
Influence, Facilitating Conditions) adapted from
the UTAUT model, and three constructs (Selfefficacy,
Anxiety, Attitude) from other models.
Protocol
The undergraduate and postgraduate students
of a local university were selected for this study.
The sample was a random sample. The data for
this research was collected by a survey instrument.
The questionnaires were given to the
students outside of the university library and
collected immediately after completion. The time
required to complete the survey was about five to
ten minutes. Responses were collected between 12
July 2008 and 20 July 2008. A total of seventythree
students responded to the survey.
Measurement Items in Survey Instrument
Measurement Items in Survey Instrument
Using a seven-point Lickert scale, respondents
were asked to indicate levels of agreement to each
item indicated. Each item question was simplified
and related to educational setting. For each
variable, there are 3-5 questions to measure it. To
ensure content validity, the survey questions are
adapted from previous studies of the UTAUT
(VANKATESH et al. 2003) and the other 8 models,
and modified to suit the study of Wikipedia used
by university students. Table 1 shows measurement
items of the constructs.
To make the data “readable and analyzable”
(BRYMAN & CRAMER, 2005, p.201), this seven-point
Likert scale ranged from “1”=Strongly Agree to
“7”=Strongly Disagree” was scaled down into
three categories representing responses as Agree,
Neutral, and Disagree. These categories were used
to achieve the purpose reducing the amount of
information summarized by using contingency
tables produced by cross-tabulation.
To investigate the aggregate measures, the
Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) was
used to recode the aggregate contiguous values
54 JORNAL OF APPLIED COMPUTING VOL. 6 - Nº 01 - JAN/JUN 2010
Table 1: Measurement Items
into distinct categories as “1”<= Agree <= “3.5” <
Neutral <= “4.5” and “4.5” < Disagree <= “7”. For
non-aggregated responses, SPSS was also used
to recode and reassign these discrete variables
value to the new scale as “1”<= Agree <=”3", “4”
= Neutral, and “5” <= Disagree <= “7”.
After completing data preparation, crosstabulation
was used to test the research
hypotheses. Statistical significance was tested
using the Pearson Chi-Square (÷2) test. This test
confirms the probability of the observed relationship
between two variables happened by chance.
Test with p-values of 0.05 or less were statistically
considered as significant, that means, a relationship
exists in the test variables and that the null
hypothesis of independence between test variables
could safely be rejected. The notation “÷2” refers
to the value of the Pearson Chi-Square test.
Constructs Models Items
Performance UTAUT Q1. I would find Wikipedia useful in my researches or assignments as an information
Expectancy (Venkatesh et al., source.
2003) Q2. Using Wikipedia would enable me to do researches or assignments more quickly.
Q3. Using Wikipedia would increase my productivity in mu researches or assignments.
Q4. Using Wikipedia would increase my chances to get better academic results.
Effort UTAUT Q5. I would find Wikipedia casy to use.
Expectancy (Venkatesh et al., Q6. Learning to use Wikipedia is easy.
2003) Q7. My interaction with Wikipedia would be clear and understandable.
Q8. It would be easy for me to become skillful using Wikipedia.
Social UTAUT Q9. My classmates use Wikipedia as an information resource in their researches or
Influence (Venkatesch et al., assignments.
2003) Q10. My friends use Wikipedia as an information resource in their researches or
assignments.
Q11. My teachers think l should use Wikipedia as an information resource in my
researches or assignments.
Q12. My University support to use Wikipedia as an information resource in the researches
or assignments.
Facilitating MPCU Q13. I have the resources necessary to use Wikipedia.
Conditions (Thompson et al., Q14. I have the knowledge necessary to use Wikipedia.
1991) Q15. The Wikipedia is always available for me to use.
Q16. The system is stable to use (no system failure).
Self-efficacy DTPB Q17. I could use Wikipedia if no one around to tell me what to do.
(Taylor and Q18. I could use Wikipedia if l could call someone if I fot stuck.
Todd, 1995; Tan Q19. I could use Wikipedia if only can use the built-in help of Wikipedia.
and Teo, 1998) Q20. I could use Wikipedia if l have a lot of time to study it first.
Anxiety SCT Q21. I feel apprehensive to use it.
(Compeau and Q22. I worry that the information in Wikipedia may be not correct or complete.
Higgins, 1995b) Q23. I worry about using it as a reference may cause a low grade for my paper.
Attitude TAM Q24. Using Wikipedia as information source is a good idea.
Toward (Davis et al., Q25. Using Wikipedia as information source makes my research or assignment more
Behavior 1989) enjoyable.
Q26. Using Wikipedia is interesting.
Q27. I prefer to use the Wikipedia compare to the traditional library.
Q28. I prefer to use the Wikipedia compare to the online databases.
Behavioral TRA Q29. I used Wikipedia in my researches or assignments as an information source for the
Intention (Sheppard et past 12 months.
al., 1988) Q30. I intend to use Wikipedia in my research and assignments as an information source
for the next 12 months.
Q31. I plan to use Wikipedia in my researches or assignments as an information source for
the next 12 months.
Q32. I am willing to use Wikipedia in my research or assignment.
REVISTA DE INFORMÁTICA APLICADA VOL. 6 - Nº 01 - JAN/JUN 2010 55
FINDINGS AND ANALYSES
Descriptive Statistics
Seventy-three students participated in the
survey. More than 60% of respondents are male,
with more than half of them did not have working
experiences. About 80% had less than three years’
and 72.6% were undergraduates. More than half
of the respondents (53.7%, n=197) owned desktop
personal computers and (53.5%, n=193) spent
more than 15 hours in computing activities. Most
of the respondents (93.7%, n=338) accessed
computers for studies at home and other places,
with 69.8 % (n=252) of them used computers for
studies at home alone. There was a reported high
rate of Internet access at home (99.4%, n=359).
Major respondents (22.7%, n=82) spent 6~10
hours and 11~15 hours on Internet/World Wide
Web for their studies. When accessing SLVC, the
77.3% (n=279) of the respondents also spent their
time on other activities.
The study found that only 17.8% of the
respondents did not have the behavior intention to
Figure 1: Testing Results of the Research Model
56 JORNAL OF APPLIED COMPUTING VOL. 6 - Nº 01 - JAN/JUN 2010
use Wikipedia, and only 6.9% did not have the use
behavior listed in the questionnaire. However, there
were 26% of the respondents choose neutral for
behavior intention, and 28.8% for use behavior.
Thus about a quarter of the respondents were not
sure if they intend to use Wikipedia, or not so often
to use Wikipedia as a major information source.
Chi-Square Tests of Significance
After the data preparation is completed, the
hypotheses are tested using cross-tabulations. In
SPSS, go to “Analyze->Descriptive Statistics->
Crosstabs” to run the cross-tabulation. Before
running the cross-tabulation, the “chi-square” in
the statistics setting must be enabled. This process
results two tables. One is the cross-tabulation,
which shows the relationship between two
variables. Another is the chi-square tests table,
which shows the significance between two
variables. In the chi-square tests table, there are
two important values. One is “?2”, which refers
to the value of the Pearson Chi-Square test for the
contingency table indicated. Another is “p”, which
refers to the p-value that indicates the level of
statistical significance of the Chi-Square test. Tests
with p-value less than 0.05 are considered
significant. Figure 1 shows the testing results of
the research model.
CONCLUSION
This study investigated the factors influencing
on the behavior intention and the use behavior to
use Wikipedia as a major information source. The
research model was generated mainly based on
the UATAUT model, and some other previous
widely accepted models. According to UTAUT,
behavioral intention was determined by performance
expectancy, effort expectancy, and social
influence, and use behavior was determined by
facilitating conditions and behavioral intention.
According to some other models, the behavior
intention was also determined by self-efficacy,
attitude, and anxiety.
The study found that the constructs from
UTAUT (performance expectancy, effort expectancy,
and social influence) were all significant to
behavior intention. However, self-efficacy was
found not significant to behavior intention. The
other two constructs (attitude, and anxiety) from
other previous models were significant to behavior
intention. The use behavior was found determined
by facilitating conditions and behavioral intention.
It was surprising that facilitating conditions
was found significant to both behavioral intention
and use behavior. However, one of the items (if I
having the resources necessary to use Wikipedia)
of facilitating conditions was found not efficiently.
If this item was ignored, the results would be that
facilitating conditions was significant to use
behavior, but not behavior intention.
Based on the findings, we identify a number
of implications for Wikipedia use by local
university students.
• The findings suggested that performance
expectancy was an important reason for the
students to use Wikipedia. If the students
believed that Wikipedia was useful and
helpful for their assignment or research, they
would intend to use it.
• The findings suggested that the effort
expectancy was also a reason for the students
to use Wikipedia. The students would intend
to use Wikipedia if they believed that it was
easy to use.
• Social influence was also suggested by the
findings as a reason for the students to use
Wikipedia. The students would intend to use
Wikipedia if the people around them
(teachers, friends, classmates, etc.) also used
Wikipedia or thought the students should use
Wikipedia as a major information source.
Thus, if the practitioners of Wikipedia want
more people to use their system, they should
try to make more people accept Wikipedia
and then these people will affect more people.
The educators can also affect the students by
their own advices or the university
suggestion.
• The findings suggested that facilitating
conditions was not significant to behavior
intention, but significant to use behavior.
Thus, even though there was not enough
hardware or software supporting the students
REVISTA DE INFORMÁTICA APLICADA VOL. 6 - Nº 01 - JAN/JUN 2010 57
to use Wikipedia, they still intended to use it
if they think they need it. But, facilitating
conditions are important in influencing
decision to use Wikipedia.
• Self-efficacy was found not to be significant
to behavior intention in this study. Thus, even
the students did not have the ability to use
Wikipedia, they might still have the intention
to use it. Therefore, lack of the ability to use
Wikipedia is not a problem for students. They
can learn if they need it.
• The positive feeling did help the students to
increase the intention to use. Therefore, if the
educators or practitioners of Wikipedia want
to encourage the students to use Wikipedia,
they should make it interesting or enjoyable.
• Anxiety was also suggested by the findings
as a reason to use Wikipedia as a major
information sources. If the students feel
apprehensively, or even fear, to use Wikipedia,
they would have the intention to use it.
Therefore, if the educators or practitioners of
Wikipedia want to encourage the students to
use Wikipedia, they should solve the
problems that the student may worry about
• Behavior intention was suggested by the
findings as an important reason to use
Wikipedia as a major information sources.
Thus the intention to use might cause an
actual use.
Certainly, more can be done. Firstly, the
findings and implications were generated based
on a specific user group. The respondents of this
survey were undergraduate and graduate
students from a local university.
Future research could use a larger sample, the
respondents from different backgrounds,
experiences, and countries. Secondly, this research
did not test the effects of the moderators like age,
gender, experiences, and voluntariness of use.
REFERENCES
AJZEN, Icek. The theory of planned behavior.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
v. 50, n. 2, p. 179-211, 1991.
ALMEIDA, Rodrigo B.; MOZAFARI, Barzan & CHO,
Junghoo. On the evolution of Wikipedia. In: 1st
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON WEBLOGS AND SOCIAL
MEDIA – ICWSM 2007. Proceedings of...
Boulder: AAAI, 2007.
ANDERSON, John E. & SCHWAGER, Paul H. SME
adoption of wireless LAN technology: applying
the UTAUT mode. In: 7th ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF
THE SOUTHERN ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION
SYSTEMS. Proceedings of... Savannah: Sais, 2004.
p. 39-43.
ARMITAGE, Chris J. & CONNER, Mark. Efficacy of
the theory of planned behavior: a meta-analytic
review. British Journal of Social Psychology, v. 40,
pt. 4, p. 471-499, December, 2001.
BANDURA, Albert. Social cognitive theory in cultural
context: an international review. Journal
of Applied Psychology, v. 51, n. 2, p. 269-290,
2002.
CHAU, Patrick Y. K. & HU, Paul Jen-Hwa. Information
technology acceptance by professionals:
A model comparison approach. Decision Sciences,
v. 32, n. 4, p. 699-719, December, 2001.
COMPEAU, Deborah R. & HIGGINS, Christopher A.
Application of social cognitive theory to training
for computer skills. Information Systems Research,
v. 6, n. 2, p. 118-143, June, 1995a.
______. Computer self-efficacy: development of
a measure and initial test. MIS Quarterly, v. 19, n.
2, p. 189-211, June, 1995b.
COMPEAU, Deborah; HIGGINS, Christopher A. &
HUFF, Sid L. Social cognitive theory and individual
reactions to computing technology: a longitudinal
study. MIS Quarterly, v. 23, n. 2, p. 145-
158, June, 1999.
DAVIS, Fred D. Perceived usefulness, perceived
ease of use, and user acceptance of information
technology. MIS Quarterly, v. 13, n. 3, p. 319-340,
September, 1989.
______. User acceptance of information technology;
system characteristics, use perceptions, and
behavior impacts. International Journal of Man58
JORNAL OF APPLIED COMPUTING VOL. 6 - Nº 01 - JAN/JUN 2010
Machine Studies, v. 38, n. 3, p. 475-487, March,
1993.
DAVIS, Fred D.; BAGOZZI, Richard P. & WARSHAW,
Paul R. Extrinsic and intrinsic motivation to use
computers in the workplace. Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, v. 22, n. 14, p. 1.111-1.132, July,
1992.
DECI, Edward L. & RYAN, Richard M. Intrinsic
motivation and self-de-termination in human
behavior. New York: Plenum, 1985.
FISHBEIN, Martin & AJZEN, Icek. Belief, attitude,
intention, and behavior: an introduction to theory
and research. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley
Publishing Company Reading, 1975.
FITZGERALD, Lynda M.; KIEL, Geoffrey C. & BOYLE,
Maree V. An exploratory study of consumers’
perceptions and experiences with on-line
purchasing. In: CHETTY, Sylvie & COLLINS, Brett
(Eds.). Proceedings of the Australian and New
Zealand Marketing Academy Conference. Bridging
marketing theory and practice. Auckland, NZ:
Massey University, 2001.
FRANCIK, Ellen; RUDMAN, Susan E.; COOPER, Donna
& LEVINE, Stephen. Putting innovation to work:
adoption strategies for multimedia communication
systems. Communications of the ACM
Archive, v. 34, n. 12, p. 52-63, December, 1991.
GARFIELD, Monica J. Acceptance of ubiquitous
computing. Information Systems Management, v.
22, n. 4, p. 24-31, 2005.
GILES, Jim. Special report Internet encyclopaedias
go head to head. Nature, v. 438, p. 900-901,
December, 2005. Available at: <http://
www.nature.com/nature/journal/v438/n7070/full/
438900a.html>. Retrieved: July 12, 2008.
GLASSBERG, Bonnie C; GROVER, Varun & TENG,
James T. C. Information systems research with an
attitude. Database for Advances in Information
Systems, v. 37, n. 2-3, p. 76-86, Spring-Summer,
2006.
HARRISON, Allison W.; RAINER JR., R. Kelly;
HOCHWARTER, Wayne A. & THOMPSON, Kenneth R.
Testing the self-efficacy performance linkage of
social-cognitive theory. The Journal of Social
Psychology, v. 137, n. 1, p. 79-87, February, 1997.
HAUSENBLAS, Heather A.; CARRON, Albert V. &
MACK, Diane A. Application of the theories of
reasoned action and planned behavior to exercise
behavior: a meta-analysis. Journal of Sport and
Exercise Psychology, v. 19, n. 1, p. 36-51, 1997.
HILLEMANN, Eric. Using Wikipedia. Carleton
College, 2008. Available at: <http://
apps.carleton.edu/campus/library/for_faculty/
faculty_find/wikipedia/>. Retrieved: July 12, 2008.
HU, Paul J.; CHAU, Patrick Y. K.; SHENG, Olivia R. L.
& TAM, Kar Y. Examining the technology acceptance
model using physician acceptance of telemedicine
technology. Journal of Management Information
Systems, v. 16, n. 2, p. 91-112, Fall, 1999.
IGBARIA, Magid. An examination of the factors
contributing to microcomputer technology
acceptance, accounting. Management and
Information Technologies, v. 4, n. 4, p. 205-224, 1994.
JASCHIK, Scott. A stand against Wikipedia. Inside
Higher ED, January, 2007. Available at: <http://
www.insidehighered.com/news/2007/01/26/
wiki>. Retrieved: August 2, 2008.
JIANG, James J.; HSU, Maxwell K.; KLEIN, Gary &
Lin, B. E-commerce user behavior model: an
empirical study. Human Systems Management, v.
19, n. 4, p. 265-276, 2000.
KARAHANNA, Elena; STRAUB, Detmar W. &
CHERVANY, Norman L. Information technology
adoption across time: a cross-sectional comparison
of pre-adoption and post-adoption beliefs. MIS
Quarterly, v. 23, n. 2, p. 183-213, June, 1999.
LANDIS, Dan: TRIANDIS, Harry C. & ADAMOPOULOS,
John. Habit and behavioral intentions as
predictors of social behavior. The Journal of Social
Psychology, v. 106, p. 227-237, 1978.
LANDRY, Brett J. L. & GRIFFETH, Rodger, HARTMAN,
Sandra. Measuring student perceptions of
blackboard using the technology acceptance
model. Decision Sciences Journal of Innovative
Education, v. 4, n. 1, p. 87-99, January, 2006.
LEGRIS, Paul; INGHAM, John & COLLERETTE, Pierre.
Why do people use information technology? A
critical review of the technology acceptance model.
Information and Management, v. 40, n. 3, p. 191-
204, January, 2003.
REVISTA DE INFORMÁTICA APLICADA VOL. 6 - Nº 01 - JAN/JUN 2010 59
LEONE, Luigi D.; PERUGINI, Marco & ERCOLANI, Anna
Paola. A comparison of three models of attitudebehavior
relationships on studying behavior
domain. European Journal of Social Psychology, v.
29, n. 2-3, p. 161-189, March/May, 1999.
LOCKE, Edwin A.; FREDERICK, Elizabeth; LEE,
Cynthia & BOBKO, Philip. Effect of self-efficacy,
goals, and task strategies on task performance.
Journal of Applied Psychology, v. 69, n. 2, p. 241-
251. 1984.
LU, June; YU, Chun-Sheng; LIU, Chang & YAO,
James E. Technology acceptance model for
wireless Internet. Internet Research: Electronic
Networking Applications and Polic, v. 13, n. 3, p.
206-222, 2003.
MA, Qingxiong & LIU, Liping. The technology
acceptance model: a meta-analysis of empirical
findings. Journal of End User Computing, v. 16, n.
1, p. 59-72, January/March, 2004.
MARCHEWKA, Jack T.; LIU, Chang & KOSTIWA, Kurt.
An application of the UTAUT model for
understanding student perceptions using course
management software. Communications of the
IIMA, v. 7, n. 2, p. 93-104, 2007.
MOORE, Gary C. & BENBASAT, Izak. Development
of an instrument to measure the perceptions of
adopting an information technology innovation.
Information Systems Research, v. 2, n. 3, p. 92-222,
September, 1991.
NOTANI, Arti S. Moderators of perceived behavioral
control’s predictiveness in the theory of planned
behavior: a meta-analysis. Journal of Consumer
Psychology, v. 7, n. 3, p. 247-271, 1998.
O’REILLY, Tim,. What is Web 2.0. O’Reilly Verlag,
September, 2005. Available at: <http://
www.oreilly.de/artikel/web20.html>. Retrieved:
August 1, 2008.
PLOUFFE, Christopher R.; HULLAND, John S. &
VANDENBOSCH, Mark. Richness versus parsimony
in modeling technology adoption decisions:
understanding merchant adoption of a smartcardbased
payment system. Information Systems
Research, v. 12, n. 2, 208-222, June, 2001.
ROGERS, Everett M. Diffusion of innovations. 4. ed.
New York: Free Press, 1995.
ROSENZWEIG, Roy. Can history be open source?
Wikipedia and the future of the past. Journal of
American History, v. 93, n. 1, p. 117-146, June, 2006.
SHEPPARD, Blair H.; HARTWICK, Jon & WARSHAW,
Paul R. The theory of reasoned action: a metaanalysis
of past research with recommendations
for modifications and future research. Journal of
Consumer Research, v. 15, n. 3, p. 325-343,
December, 1988.
TAYLOR, Shirley & TODD, Peter. Decomposition and
crossover effects in the theory of planned
behavior: a study of consumer adoption
intentions. International Journal of Research in
Marketing, v. 12, n. 2, p. 137-155, July, 1995.
TAN, Margaret & TEO, Thompson S. H. Factors
influencing the adoption of the Internet.
International Journal of Electronic Commerce, v. 2,
n. 3, p. 5-18, March, 1998.
THOMPSON, Ronald L.; HIGGINS, Christopher A. &
HOWELL, Jane M. Personal computing: toward a
conceptual model of utilization. MIS Quarterly, v.
15, n. 1, p. 124-143, March, 1991.
TRIANDIS, Harry C. Interpersonal behavior.
Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole, 1977.
VALLERAND, Robert J. & BISSONNETTE, Robert.
Intrinsic, extrinsic, and amotivational styles as predictors
of behavior: a prospective study. Journal of
Personality, v. 60, n. 3, p. 599-620, September, 1992.
VENKATESH, Viswanath. Determinants of perceived
ease of use: integrating perceived behavioral
control, computer anxiety and enjoyment into the
technology acceptance model. Information
Systems Research, v. 11, n. 4, p. 342-365, 2000.
VENKATESH, Viswanath & DAVIS, Fred D. A
theoretical extension of the technology acceptance
model: four longitudinal field studies.
Management Science, v. 46, n. 2, p. 186-204,
February, 2000.
VENKATESH, Viswanath. & MORRIS, Michael G.
Why don’t men ever stop to ask for directions?
Gender, social influence, and their role in
technology acceptance and usage behavior. MIS
Quarterly, v. 24, n. 1, p. 115-139, March, 2000.
VENKATESH, Viswanath; MORRIS, Michael G.;
DAVIS, Gordon B. & DAVIS, Fred D. User
60 JORNAL OF APPLIED COMPUTING VOL. 6 - Nº 01 - JAN/JUN 2010
acceptance of information technology: toward a
unified view. MIS Quarterly, v. 27, n. 3, p. 425-
478, September, 2003.
VUONG, Ba-Quy; LIM, Ee-Peng; SUN, Aixim; LE,
Minh-Tam; LAUW, Hady Wirawan & CHANG,
Kuiyu. On ranking controversies in Wikipedia:
models and evaluation. In: 1st INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCE ON WEB SEARCH AND WEB DATA
MINING – WSDM 2008. Proceedings of... Stanford:
ACM, 2008. p. 171-182.
WIKIPEDIA WEBSITE. Wikipedia, the free
encyclopedia. 2008a. Available at: <http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia#cite_note-Who-
13>. Retrieved: August 10, 2008.
______. Wikipedia: Academic use. 2008b.
Available at: <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:Academic_use#cite_note-0>. Retrieved:
August 10, 2008.
______. Wikipedia: Encyclopedia. 2008c.
Available at: <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Encyclopedia#cite_note-0>. Retrieved: October
30, 2008.
WIXOM, Barbara H. & TODD, Peter A. A theoretical
integration of user satisfaction and technology
acceptance. Information Systems Research, v. 16,
n. 1, p. 85-102, March, 2005.